The Invoice application has a header page and invoice lines. Often the invoice header will be entered as soon as the invoice has been received. The matching of the invoice lines to the receipts and PO, the 3-way match, being performed at a later stage. A PO need not be referenced on the Invoice header as Maximo supports an invoice where the lines may reference different POs.

Maximo supports centralized invoicing across the sites of the same organization. The invoice itself exists at the Site level. Centralized invoicing operates when there is both centralized purchasing, a PO may contain lines that originate from PRs from different sites, and de-centralized purchasing, for example each site has its own procurement function and there are no purchase orders with PO lines from different sites. In both cases an invoice may be received centrally. The vendor may reference multiple POs and those POs may originate from different sites. 

While the Invoices application is most widely used for invoices and credit notes against a purchase order (PO), not all invoice records need have a PO in Maximo. For example, an invoice for consignment items used does not need a PO, an invoice that supports a payment schedule on a lease/rental contract or a warranty/service contract does not need a PO, approved labor hours against labour rate contracts can be used to create invoices without a PO. 

When creating an invoice, you would enter the vendor’s invoice number, invoice date, due date, the company who the payment will be made to, then when you go to select a PO, it is filtered by this company. If the invoice references the PO, then entering this first will default the remit to company. To complete the header information, you may optionally enter the pretax total (Net), tax and allow the invoice total (gross) to be calculated. If the totals are not entered on the header, then they will be calculated from the invoice lines. A checkbox indicates that tax is paid to the vendor, this defaults from their record in the Companies application but it can be changed.

On the Invoice Lines tab, the Copy PO Lines button would be used. This shows all the lines on the PO or those that have not been invoiced. In the case that no PO is entered on the invoice header then this shows all the lines on all POs placed with the remit to company. There are three tabs, PO Lines, Materials and Services, the last two being the received lines. You check the lines that you wish to copy to create lines on the invoice. 

The New Row button is only used for adding line types of service and standard service, for example to handle freight charges, which may not be known at the point when the PO was raised. For standard services the Prorate Service check box will be enabled. When checked this allows you to use the Allocate Services action to distribute the standard service cost across the other lines of the invoice. The prorate cost on each invoice line shows the amount that has been prorated. The loaded cost figure shows the line cost plus the prorated cost. 

The Distribute Costs button allows an invoice line to be distributed across multiple GL Accounts. This is handled by applying a percentage to each distribution line, the percentages must add up to 100. When distributed a check box will be marked on the invoice line and the button can be used again to view the distribution. 

At the end of the Invoice Line table window, and as an action, is the button View Related Records. This shows the invoice line and how it relates to its PR, RFQ, PO, Material or Service Receipt, Contract References, and its Invoice Transactions.

The statuses of an invoice are generally entered, waiting to be approved, hold, approved, paid, and cancelled. There are two other statuses associated with reversing an invoice, pending reverse, and reversed. There is also the status of SCHED (schedule) which is used with invoices created by a contract payment schedule. When you approve an invoice there is the option to close POs where receipts are complete.

The invoice types are invoice, credit, and debit. Debit notes may be used as a document detailing the returns of goods to the vendor when they are found to be faulty, it essentially requests the vendor to provide a credit note once they have received the returned goods. However, don’t forget to use negative quantities when using the debit note this way. When you receive a credit note the original invoice can be referenced and the debit note can be cancelled. For a credit note the values entered are all positive on the credit note but the values in the database will be negative. 

There are other invoice types. Consignment is used for consignment payment invoices, payment schedule is used with invoicing of contracts with a payment schedule, and labor transaction is used when the invoice records are created from the Labor Reporting application. There are three other invoice types associated with invoice, credit note, or debit note reversal.  For consignment invoices there is only one button below the Invoice Lines table window and that is Select Consignment Transactions.

You can enter an invoice against a PO where there have been no receipts, but you cannot approve the invoice if any of the PO lines is marked as receipt required. You can enter an invoice where there is no PO and therefore no receipt, for example a utility bill or a rental payment. You can also enter an invoice against a contract of type Purchase, Lease/Rental, or Warranty/Service, again without the use of a PO. For example, when invoices are received for services performed by sub-contractors against work orders where there might just be a service contract with the supplier then there may not be a PO because the authority to spend has been granted on the work order. In this case, the service contract is referenced, and invoice lines of type service are entered. Maximo creates the service receipt when the invoice is approved, and this then shows on the work order as actual services. The default table data can be useful to default onto the invoice lines the values for the work order, location, asset, or GL debit account.

The GL posting date will be set to the vendors invoice date or date/time when the invoice record was created, but it can be changed. At approval of the invoice the GL posting date can be checked to see whether it is in an open financial period, and if it isn’t the GL posting date will be set to the start date of the next open financial period. There are settings in Organizations application for this. They are provided to reduce errors encountered when Maximo invoices are interfaced through to an Accounts Payable ledger of a financial system.

Occasionally there is a need to completely reverse an approved and paid invoice and Maximo supports this. This might occur when a vendor sends a cancelled invoice and provides a new one for a different amount, or when mistakes are made during the data entry of the invoice. The action Reverse Invoice can be used against an invoice, credit note, or debit note. It can only be applied against records at approved or paid state, otherwise the Delete Invoice action or change status to Cancel can be used. When the Reverse Invoice dialog opens, you will need to use the Autonumber button or enter the new invoice number, provide a reversal reason, optionally change the GL posting date and select the status for the reverse invoice record, pending reversal, approved, or paid. When this is set to approved, then all invoice transactions are reversed by writing identical records but with the opposite sign for the quantities and costs. The status on the original record is changed to REVERSED and the Reverse Invoice field is set to the reversing record. On that record the original invoice field will be set so that you can easily track back and forth between the original invoice and its reversal record. You cannot reverse a reversed invoice and you cannot reverse an invoice created from one of the Contract applications or the Labor Reporting application. Only the records manually created in the Invoice application can be reversed.

When approving invoices there is an upper limit defined by a user’s security group. There are also upper and lower tolerances for the total invoice amount, total tax and total of services on the security group. These may result in a particular user not being able to approve the invoice. 