The Purchase Order (PO) application has a similar layout and set of tabs as that found on the Purchase Requisitions (PR) application. There are differences and the most notable is that a PO can be revised. If a PO is not revised then it is expected to have the following statuses, waiting on approval, approved, in progress, closed. But when the Revise PO action is used on an approved PO it is moved to pending revision status and the revision number is incremented. The new revision is a complete copy of the previous revision which is zero for a new PO. When the status on the new revision is changed to approved, the original PO is changed to a status of revised and is now marked as in history and so will be hidden unless you specifically search for it. There is an action to View Revision History which shows a summary of the lines, their changes and additions made at each revision. Like PR the amount which a user can approve on a PO is governed by a limit on the security groups to which they belong.

A PO must have a vendor unless it is an internal order on a storeroom, a PR doesn’t. The default PO type is STD – Standard, you might change it to PART – Parts, or SERV – Service if the PO is a material only or service only purchase order. It may also be set to REL – Release when the PO is a release created from a blanket purchase contract. When reordering consignment inventory the reorder process will create a PO of type CONSIGNMENT. This behaves similarly to a standard PO except that only items marked as consignment can exist on the PO lines, the only line type can be Item.

On the PO Lines tab, the set of fields is like that found on the PR Lines tab of the Purchase Requisition application. There is an action to Copy PR Line Items To PO, which allows lines from different PR’s to be brought together on the same PO. Maximo supports centralised purchasing; the PR’s can be ordering materials for storerooms on different sites, the Site field in the Delivery Details section indicates the destination site for what is being ordered. There is no function for consolidating like items from different PRs to the same PO line. The classification if it was used on the PR line will also need to be enabled for the POLINE object for it to be shown along with any attributes on the Specifications tab.

The main difference on the PO line which is not seen on the PR line is the Receipts section. This not only shows what has been received against the PO line, but it is also where you can enter a receipt tolerance percentage, a receipt tolerance quantity, or if the line type is service and no quantity is given then a receipt tolerance amount. 

There is a function called prorate service which allows the cost of standard services to be spread across the other lines of the PO. A standard service might be freight costs or an installation charge. The distribution of the standard service cost across the other lines of the PO is performed in the Invoice application.

Below the PO lines table window is a button called Vendor Analysis which can be applied to the active PO line. A dialog opens to show the item and the vendors where it has been previously purchased. It shows price, promised lead time, actual lead time and information about rejected quantities. A useful piece of information for the buyer to check whether the vendor is the correct one to use for this item. A button is available for setting a vendor as the primary vendor for the item.

Another button below the PO Lines table window is Distribute Costs. This can only be used on direct issue items, not ones destined for a storeroom, and it can only be used for non-rotating items. It allows the cost of the PO line to be distributed across multiple GL account codes. 

There is an action to Complete Receipts, but it is normal to use the Receiving application instead. There is also an action to Move/Modify Assets, this also appears in the Receiving application. Otherwise, the actions and tabs are as found on the Purchase Requisition application.