A Purchase Requisition (PR) is generally created from an inventory reorder process for stocked materials, approval of a work order that requires direct issue materials or services, or on the approval of a desktop requisition requiring non-stocked or special-order items. A PR can of course be created manually.

A direct issue is Maximo’s term for saying that something will go via the PR route rather than creating a reservation against a storeroom. The item will be issued directly to the asset, location or work order on receipt and will not go via a storeroom where balances would be adjusted, hence services are always direct issue. The PRs for direct issue items and services are created by running the reorder process in the Inventory application but this can be, and is often, set-up to run as a background process (Cron Task).

A PR is defined at the site level in Maximo. It has a set of statuses, waiting to be approved, approved, closed, or cancelled. The amount which a user can approve on a PR is governed by a limit on the security groups to which they belong. The PR may automatically move to CLOSE status when its PR lines have been added to a PO or Contract. When a PR is created it can reference a Purchase or Lease/Rental Contract which must be approved and active with respect to the contract’s start and end dates. If a contract is referenced, then all the PR lines must reference items on that contract.

A PR is normally placed against a vendor, but the vendor field is not mandatory, as a requisitioner you may not know which vendor the buyer will use for the order, and several PR lines may end up on multiple Purchase Orders (PO) placed with different vendors. Some fields on the company record for the vendor are copied across to the PR, for example whether items purchased will require inspection or whether there is an agreement to pay the vendor on receipt, in which case Maximo will create the invoice when the items are received. 

A PR can also be an internal order which is used for the transfer of stock between storerooms, there is an Organizations application setting to determine when this applies. 

On the PR Lines tab multiple lines can be created. There are buttons for selecting contract items, items previously supplied by the vendor, or the spare parts of an asset, but often the New Row button will be used. When a new row is created the line type will need to be selected from Item, Material, Service, Special Order, Standard Service, or Tool and depending on what is selected the item field will either become required, filled, or made read-only. This functions the same as on a Desktop Requisition. A PR line of type Standard Service or Service does not require a quantity or unit cost, a total cost can be supplied instead.

On selecting an item (material, service, or tool) then fields from the Item Master, Service Items or Tools application will be copied, for example the last price received from the vendor will be used as the unit cost. If defined on the item a classification may be entered and the Specifications tab will show the attributes associated with the classification, this helps the buyer understand what is being requested. To be populated the classification needs to be defined to be used with the object PRLINES.

If an item is referenced on an approved and active contract, then it will be defaulted onto the PR line and the unit price on the contract used as the unit cost. You will not be able to change the unit cost unless a setting on the contract allows you to do so. You should be able to change the quantity unless the contract forbids this. If there are multiple active contracts for the item, then a warning message will be shown, and you’ll be guided towards using the View Contracts button to select the vendor contract to apply.

Normally the PR lines will be charged to either a work order, storeroom, location, or asset. This is done to derive a GL account for charging purposes. One or more components of the GL account may also be derived from the commodity group of the item. GL account validation is a setting which may be disabled for an organization, but if it isn’t then it is best to ensure that all components of the GL account are filled for each PR line as it will stop a PO from being approved if this is not the case.

If the PR is being created manually through the Purchase Requisition application, then below the PR lines table window are some fields which act as defaults when a PR line is created. This default table data will help to fill-out the charge to fields on each line so that the GL debit account is derived, very useful if the PR is to have many lines.

There is a button called Distribute Costs which will allow a PR line to be charged to multiple GL accounts based on a percentage or amount. This can only be done for direct issue items and non-rotating items; services can also be split. For example, ten PCs are being purchased, five will go to one department, two to another and three to a third department. We want to issue a single PO line for the ten PCs where each department will be charged according to the quantity they will receive. There is no practical limit to the number of GL accounts involved in the cost distribution.

The Ship To / Bill To tab is used to specify the shipping and billing address, mostly this should be defaulted to the addresses set up for the site in the Organizations application, but it can be changed to one of the other addresses, it might also be derived from a contract.

From the PR there are actions to Create PO or Create Contract, only the three types of Purchase Contract can be selected by Maximo clients (Purchase, Pricing or Blanket). There is also an action called View Related Records for viewing the related POs, RFQs, Material or Service Receipts, Invoices, Invoice Transactions and Contract References.

There is a Log tab with the ability to create log notes on the PR. For users with privilege, they can modify the work log or delete unwanted log notes. There is an action Create Communication to create an email and relate this to the PR so that it can be seen from the Communication Log tab.