The Receiving application has two tabs, one for material receipts the other for service receipts. You are receiving against a PO. For receiving items into a storeroom where the items have been transferred from another storeroom using an inventory usage document, then the Shipment Receiving application should be used.

The PO must be in approved or in progress state to be able to receive the items or services.

The easiest method of adding a receipt to a PO is to use the button Select Ordered Items which opens a dialog showing the items that were ordered. If you attempt to receive a quantity greater than that ordered, then you will receive a warning. If you have set up receipt tolerances on the PO line and you receive more than you ordered, then the warning will ask whether you wish to accept the quantity ordered and the tolerance amount. For example, a quantity of ten were ordered, the receipt tolerance is one but fifteen of the items are received, the warning will ask whether you wish to accept eleven. Only those eleven will be added to the storeroom, the remaining four will show up as over received quantity and should be returned to the supplier. Transactions which are only part of the quantity ordered are acceptable.

If the PO line is marked as Inspection Required then when you receive a quantity the inspection status will be changed to WINSP – waiting inspection, the To Location will be set to the holding location for the destination site. After inspection you use the action Change Inspection Status, and on this dialog, you enter the accepted quantity and if necessary the rejected quantity and a rejection code. A rejection will create an additional transaction of type RETURN with a negative of the quantity that you rejected.

For rotating items, after you have changed the inspection status it will move to WASSET – waiting for serialization, otherwise it moves to COMP – complete. There is an action Receive Rotating Items which opens a dialog with one line for each quantity received. Ideally your site will have been set-up to use auto-numbered assets in which case you use the Autonumber button, and this creates an asset number for each record. You should enter a serial number for each record and if there is an item assembly structure defined for the item then the Apply IAS button can be used on each record to create the asset’s subassemblies and spare parts. When you have completed the serialization the inspection status moves to COMP, for stocked items the issue type is TRANSFER to indicate that it is transferred to the destination storeroom.

A receipt status on the PO will show as NONE, PARTIAL or COMPLETE depending on how much of the quantity of each item has been received.

If you make a mistake the receipt can be voided by using the button, Select Receipts to Void. This creates a similar entry but with a negative quantity and a type (issue type) of VOIDRECEIPT instead of RECEIPT.

If a quantity of item needs to be returned to the vendor because they have been found to be faulty, or the wrong item has been ordered, then the Select Items for Return button can be used if it is a non-rotating item, alternatively use the Select Rotating Assets for Return for rotating items. This creates a new transaction record of issue type RETURN with a negative quantity, the transaction can then be selected, and a rejection code entered. 

If the item ordered is on behalf of a work order, location, asset, or GL Account then the Issue on Receipt flag will be checked and the storeroom will be read-only, no storeroom balances will be changed by this type of transaction.

There is a New Row button where you could enter the PO line number or the item number, but if either doesn’t exist on the PO you will receive an error message, nothing will be gained by using this button over the others provided.

A rotating item or rotating tool that was ordered against a PO as a direct issue item and that has now been received and the asset created can now be moved to the requesting location using the action Move/Modify Assets. If assets are received into a storeroom, then they must be issued from the storeroom. 

The receiving of services is like that for materials (or tools), but you use the Service Receipts tab. The Select Ordered Services button is used and if a quantity was on the PO, you enter how many of the service are being received. If there is no quantity the quantity due field will be read only but after you have closed the dialog you can amend the line cost to reflect how much of the cost is being received. There is a field for entering a percentage, in which case Maximo will calculate the cost based on this percentage. With services a claim number can be entered, this might be a reference given by the supplier of the services.

If the PO line was marked as Inspection Required then the inspection status will move to WINSP and the action Change Inspection Status is used, if necessary, a rejected quantity can be entered, the same as for material receipts. You can void a service receipt when a mistake is made in its processing. You can also use the button Select Services for Return if you do not wish to accept the whole quantity of the service or its cost. There is no reason to use the action Receive Rotating Items and all service items are marked as issue on receipt, no storerooms are involved.

When a work order has planned services, you use the Reorder option in the Inventory application to raise the PR and then create the PO. You can only receive the services using the Receiving application, you cannot receive from the Actuals tab on the Work Order Tracking application. You can add actual materials on a work order in the Work Order Tracking application, but not actual services. A work order service will normally go through the PR, PO, and Receiving processes unless it is processed directly in an invoice without a PO (see later).