The Request for Quotation (RFQ) application will typically be used for high value items or services prior to raising a PO, or for several stocked items belonging to the same commodity group as a precursor to awarding a contract. An RFQ can be created for an existing Purchase Contract which is useful when retendering the contract. A new RFQ is created, and PR lines copied to the RFQ. Ultimately the RFQ will be awarded to a vendor and the vendor’s quotation lines used to create a PO or Contract. An RFQ exists at the site level.

The RFQ starts at a status of in progress. The RFQ header will define the relevant dates, required, reply by, the date when quotation entries will close. The header also has a ship to and reply to address which must be addresses that have been referenced against the site in the Organizations application.

The RFQ lines tab is very similar to that for a PR. All the same line types are available and if an item references a classification the attribute details are shown on the Specifications tab, in this case the use with object is RFQLINE. As you add lines then if the items have been purchased previously the vendor will be added to the RFQ Vendors table window. When all RFQ lines have been added and the final set of vendors determined for the RFQ then the status is changed to Ready to be Sent. When the quotation has been sent to all vendors the status should be changed to Sent to Vendors. At either of these statuses the RFQ lines will be made read-only, and no new lines can be created, also no new vendors can be added to the RFQ.

On the Quotations tab there are two sub tabs, Vendor, and Item. When a quotation is received back from a vendor the vendor is selected and the button Select RFQ Lines is used to pick all lines or those for which a quotation response was made. The unit cost, economic order quantity and delivery time should be recorded if they have been provided by the vendor along with any relevant remarks.

When all vendors have provided a quotation, or the close date has been reached then the RFQ Vendor Comparison report can be used to assist in the decision making on which vendors will be awarded the RFQ or who might be awarded each line. The Items subtab provides a direct comparison to be made between the vendors for each item of the RFQ. As you select the vendor and check the Awarded field or use the Award All button then the same checkbox will become read-only for the other vendors who supplied a quotation and were ultimately unsuccessful. At this point the RFQ status can be changed to completed.

The buttons to Create PO or Create Contract are then used, and a PO or purchase contract will be created for the vendor and the awarded lines. A checkbox on the RFQ line can determine whether the item can be copied to a contract, or not. The status of the RFQ may automatically move to close when all RFQ lines have been awarded and a PO or Contract raised for them, there is a setting in Organizations application for this. On the RFQ line in the Related Records section the PO and PO line, or Contract and Contract Line will be shown.

There is a tab to enter Terms and Conditions for the RFQ and a table window to associate terms and conditions specified by the vendor.